In this section, we'll get a
first look at object-oriented
or oo programming.
We've already done a bit of oo
programming when we use the standard
string and vector classes, but now
we'll learn much more about oo
programming and especially how to
create our own classes and objects.
Before learning about c++
object-oriented features, we'll
learn what oo programming is and
why it's so popular and useful.
Then we'll learn exactly what
classes and objects are, and how
they work in the world of oo.
We'll see how to declare some
simple classes and create
objects from those classes.
We'll then see how we can use the dot
operator and the pointer operators,
so that we can get to the parts of
an object that we want to access.
Two of the main strengths of object
orientation are encapsulation
and information hiding.
We'll define these concepts in this
section and see how c++ is public
and private access modifiers,
allow us to prevent access to parts
of our code while still allowing
access to the interface that will
be used by other programmers.
Then we'll turn our attention
to the many ways that we can
construct or initialize our objects.
This is all done with constructors.
These are methods that we write
that give us control over exactly
how our objects are created.
There are lots of variations
in constructors, and we'll
look at the most common and
understand their primary purpose.
We'll learn about initializer
lists, default, overloaded, copy
and move constructors, and we'll
see when and how to implement them.
Sometimes when we work with
pointers inside classes.
We have to be aware of whether
the pointer or what the pointer
is pointing to is being copied.
This concept is called
shallow versus deep copying.
By default, c++ provides
shallow copying.
But sometimes we need to do more than
that, and we'll learn how and why.
We'll also discuss destructors.
Sometimes when an object is
destroyed, there can be things that
we have to do to tidy up after them.
This might include closing files,
freeing allocated memory, writing
log messages to files and so forth.
C++ provides destructors that
are called automatically when
objects are going to be destroyed.
Then we'll learn about the
this pointer, which many
times confuses beginning c++
programmers, but don't worry,
it's pretty simple once explained.
Sometimes when we write oo programs,
we want certain attributes to
belong to the entire class and
not to the objects themselves.
That's exactly what static
class members allow you to do.
Finally, we'll wrap up this section
by understanding the difference
between structs and classes and
see how c plus plus classes can grant
friendship privileges to other
parts of the program so they can
access private information in
an easy but controlled manner.
Once you complete this section,
you'll have the basic fundamentals
necessary to model your programs
using real-world objects.
This will not only help you think
more abstractly, it'll also make your
code more robust, easier to debug
and easier for others to modify.
This sounds like a lot to learn,
but we'll take it in small steps
and build up our classes as we go.
Let's get started with
oo programming and c++.